Document the CSS loading order (#66)
vaadin/docs: articles/theming/css-loading-order.asciidoc

---
title: CSS Loading Order
order: 110

> layout: page

Reviewer: ```suggestion
layout: page
```
Unnecessary attribute.

Author: GH says there are no changes. Should I remove the line completely? `layout: page`

Reviewer: Yes, remove the line completely.

Author: done

---

= CSS Loading Order

Application Theme is a recommended way to organize themes in a Vaadin application, however, Vaadin still supports the old ways to set the styles, like a CSS import and StyleSheet annotations.
Styles applied with a different approaches have different loading order, i.e. the priority they are computed in the browser and possibly override each other.

In order to keep the application theming and styles consistent and well-formed, it's important to take into account the loading order of the following CSS sources:

. `Lumo` theme styles

> . Parent theme (_if used_)

Reviewer: Is Lumo always loaded, regardless of how I configure my app – even if I decide to use the Material theme? Also, I assumed Lumo would be a parent theme by itself.

Author: Right, if you use `@Theme(themeClass = Material.class)` or another custom theme class `@Theme(themeClass = CustomTheme.class)`, then the Lumo won't be loaded. Lumo is loaded, if
- No `@Theme` provided
- No `themeClass` provided, but `themeName` provided in `@Theme` parameters.

Thus, I believe I should remove the first item (Lumo) and make a note for Parent theme, that the Lumo is always a parent theme, if the application theme is used (`@Theme("my-theme")`).

Author: done

. Current theme
. Application-specific bundled CSS added via `@CssImport` (_if used_)
. Application-specific unbundled CSS added via `@Stylesheet` (_if used_)

> . Styles added on Java side via `Page::addStylesheet` (_if used_)

Reviewer: This only describes the Flow/Java side of things. If this article is only about that, then it should be mentioned somewhere that this does not apply to Fusion.

Author: Good catch! The Fusion theming is only planned to be done so far. So, I will add a note that this chapter is only for Java-side views. This chapter can be supplemented then, as soon as we conclude the Fusion theming.

Author: done

Styles with a bigger loading order have a bigger precedence.

> For example, the following style if placed in `global.css` within application theme folder `frontend/themes/my-theme` will override the default `Lumo` font size `1rem` to `10px`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following style, if placed in `global.css` within the application theme folder `frontend/themes/my-theme`, will override the default `Lumo` font size `1rem` with `0.875rem`:
```

> [source,css]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, CSS]
```
The source code language will be visible as written in the docs site (but converted to lowercase for syntax highlighting libraries).

----
html {

>     --lumo-font-size-m: 10px;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    --lumo-font-size-m: 0.875rem;
```
Let’s not give users examples that would give them poor results (10px is too small size in general for main text, and using fixed pixel sizes is also discouraged).

---
title: CSS Loading Order
order: 110
---

= CSS Loading Order

> A theme is the recommended way to organize styles in a Vaadin application.

Reviewer 2: > A theme

Should it be "An application theme" or something more specific?
The term "theme" is quite broad, and I confuse between "Lumo" theme or [Custom theme](https://vaadin.com/docs/v14/themes/creating-a-custom-theme.html).

Author: Initially, it was `application theme`, but then replaced by just `theme` as per Jouni's comment:
>We are still discussing how to write about this new feature, but the current assumption is that it will not be “application theme”.

Reviewer: Yeah, I would like us to avoid introducing new terminology with this feature, it we can avoid it.

However, the other ways to import styles, namely the CSSImport and StyleSheet annotations, are still supported.
Styles applied with different approaches have different loading order.
That is, the priority they are computed in the browser and possibly override each other.

.For server-side views only
[NOTE]
This article considers only server-side views (Flow/Java).
Client-side views (Fusion/TypeScript) are not covered.

To keep the application theming and styles consistent and well-formed, it's important to consider the loading order of the following CSS sources:

. `Lumo` theme

> . Parent theme (_if used_)

Reviewer 2: A bit more details about "Parent theme" maybe helpful ((parent of what, how to make it), maybe a link to a related content.

Author: done

> . Current theme

Reviewer 2: Since I don't see a specific mention about "application theme", I'm not sure what is the "current theme".

Author: Would it be clearer to replace it with `Custom theme`?

Reviewer 2: So "current theme" here is a [custom theme](https://vaadin.com/docs/v14/themes/creating-a-custom-theme.html) but not "application theme"?

Reviewer 2: So it's the "application theme", but the term we use in this article is "custom theme" or just "theme".
I guess a link to the related content for "current theme" is also helpful.

Author: Yep, I propose to add a brief explanation about `Current theme` and add a link to `application-theme.asciidoc` chapter, where the general description is provided.

Author: done

. Application-specific bundled CSS added via `@CssImport` (_if used_)
. Application-specific unbundled CSS added via `@Stylesheet` (_if used_)
. Styles added on Java side via `Page::addStylesheet` (_if used_)

> NOTE: `Lumo` theme won't be loaded and applied if another theme class is provided, like this `@Theme(themeClass = MyCustomTheme.class)`, or if

Reviewer: I think either use a proper admonition block (`[NOTE]`), or leave out the `NOTE: ` prefix.

Author: done

To keep the application theming and styles consistent and well-formed, it's important to consider the loading order of the following CSS sources:

. `Lumo` theme
. Application-specific bundled CSS added via <<importing-style-sheets, @CssImport>> (_if used_)
. Styles added on Java side via <<ways-of-importing, Page::addStylesheet>> (_if used_)

> . Application-specific unbundled CSS added via <<importing-style-sheets, @Stylesheet>> (_if used_)

Reviewer: These cross references (links) do not work.

Author: done

Author: Not done, still does not work...

. Parent theme (_if used_)
. Current theme

[NOTE]
`Lumo` theme won't be loaded and applied if another theme class is provided, namely the `@Theme(themeClass = MyCustomTheme.class)`, or if `@NoTheme` found.

> The <<application-theme#extending-an-existing-application-theme, Parent Theme>> is an existing theme, which styles and variables are inherited in the Current theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The <<application-theme#extending-an-existing-application-theme, parent theme>> is an existing theme, whose styles and variables are inherited by the current theme.
```
"Parent theme" and “current theme” are not a proper nouns.

> The Current Theme is a theme used in your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Current theme" is the theme used in your application.
```

> It can be a theme created locally (as described in <<application-theme, Application Theme>> chapter), <<application-theme#creating-a-reusable-applicationtheme, Reusable Theme>> packed as a `jar` dependency, or a <<creating-a-custom-theme, Custom Theme>>.

Reviewer: The first and last cross references (links) here do not work. Cross references need to include the `#` before the comma, e.g. `<<article/path#, Article Name>>`.

Reviewer: You can use the preview deployment to check that the links work.

Author: done

Author: Not done, still does not work...
